So our service worker for now is ready,
ready for adding more code later, okay?
So far, I'm done with this, so
I don't need the debugger line, okay?
So we will have more event listeners,
one per API.
Make sense?
Okay, so now going back to the slides,
it's time to talk a little bit about
user interface and notifications.
So we are in the background, so
updating the user interface,
okay, if possible.
Why if possible?
Because maybe the client, the website
is still there, maybe it's not.
But let's say it's there,
updating the DOM won't notice the user.
The user is not seeing my app,
that's why we're in the background.
So what if we wanna notify the user
that something is happening?
Well, a little bit of history here.
So we could only notify the user for
background tabs before changing the title.
In fact, there are still some websites
doing this, like eCommerce websites or
things like Expedia or
wherever you were searching for a flight.
Then you change tabs and you see
the title change, hey, hey, hey, hey,
don't forget your flight.
Your flight is here, okay?
The offer is ending.
So you change the title element,
document.title using JavaScript, okay?
That's an old trick,
which is still working.
Another trick was
the changing the favicon.
I will show you one example in a minute.
We can still do that.
Yeah, it's there, okay?
That's maybe a little evil,
little, little, okay?
But anyway, [COUGH] you can do that if
the user is still seeing the browser.
You don't know if the user is watching or
seeing the browser on the screen anyway.
Playing audio.
Yeah, and I'm not saying do that,
but it's there.
Force a refocus.
Fortunately for us, that's not
working in most browsers these days.
But that was a way to do
things a few years ago.
For example, even making an alert
will actually refocus the tab that is
making the alert in the background,
which was actually really, really bad.
Anyway, so even we had tricks to not
letting the user unload the page.
The old trick that when you try to
close the page, the page says, no,
are you sure you wanna close the page,
things like that.
Fortunately, that's history.
So let's say that the favicon and
the title is still there, but
yeah, maybe it's not
the best of the solutions.
So let me show you one thing
in action with this website
that you can try if you want as well.
So this website is showing you
an example of the animating favicon.
So you need to look at
the favicon there on my tab.
If I load this, can you see that?
Of course, you can do any animation.
You can do a canvas.
In fact,
there are some games in the favicon.
There is a pong game in the favicon, okay?
Anyway, but I wanna show you something.
Let's see if you can
catch what's going on.
I will hit Load, so it will start.
And of course, you can start this
process with page visibility,
on visibility change, okay?
So look at this, it's loading.
But look now, what's going on?
Is it stopped?
What do you think?
I know it's really small.
>> It's going in the background,
so the set time or
the set interval has been slowed down.
>> Exactly, so the timer throttle now,
so now it's slower.
So you can see in action the timer issue.
And if I go back to that tab, you can see
it speed up, and now it's slow again.
So here we can see in action, okay?
The timer's issue,
how the timer is being throttled, okay?
Anyway, this is just for
having some fun really quickly.
That's not how we are going
to notify things to the user.
So today, the only cross-platform
solution is web notifications.
Is this push?
Not really.
A web notification,
it's actually a notification that
appears in the operating system
in the same place as push
notifications from native apps,
but they are local.
In fact, let me tell you this.
In the web, or from the web, at least,
we don't have really
web push notifications.
We have web push and
we have local notifications.
Web push,
we accept the service worker, and
the service worker creates a notification,
but we don't have a direct line here.
It's not like the server creates
a notification that you will see
on the page.
That's how the web works.
So we have actually two different APIs,
the web notification
API that was known as the desktop
notification API initially,
and the push API, two different APIs.
In fact, now in Safari,
that now is they are supported,
when you go to Experimental Features,
we have the Push API there,
that's enabled by default, and
you also have notifications.
I think it says enabled, well,
somewhere it's notifications.
It's a different API, okay?
The only problem with this API with
notification is that it requires
user's permission, and
it's the same permission for push.
So this is a mess.
So that's how it works.
So you don't have a permission for
local notification and
another permission for push.
It's just notifications.
If the user is granting you permission,
then you can create local notifications
and or send push messages to your web app.
We don't have two permissions, and
a lot of users hate push notifications.
So they will say no, okay?
So that's a problem,
I think that we have a problem as
a web platform community here, okay?
So this is not well specced, I think.
In fact, there are two APIs to
create a notification right now.
And if you try to google them or
even to read about them in MDN or
the W3C, it's not completely clear
which one you should be using.
We have the classic Desktop
Notification API that is only available
in the window lower scope and
in web workers, not in service workers.
So we cannot use them from a service
worker, that's the old one, okay?
But it's still there.
And then we have Web Push, but
I mentioned, hey, Web Push is not for
the notification, yeah, but
the Web Push spec came with another
API that replaces the previous one for
notifying the user.
And this one is available from
the service worker's scope.
So it's kind of messy, okay?
In fact, which one you should be using,
because we here,
we are going to probably, we want to
render messages from the background.
Probably, we want the one
from service workers.
In fact, only on Android, only on Android,
I don't know why only on Android,
so the desktop notification API,
it's marked as deprecated.
So if you try to use this one on Chrome
on Android, you will see a message
in the console saying that the API
is deprecated, not on desktop, okay?
Anyway, the first step to use this
API is to ask for permission.
The API is actually pretty simple because
it's an old API, because it's coming
from a couple of years ago, it's not like
promise base, it's like a classic API.
It's a directly
Notification.requestPermission.
Fortunately, today,
we have a version that is promise base.
So the original one was not
actually giving me anything
in return, but
now it returns you a promise.
And it can be granted, denied, or default.
Default means that the user
has closed the dialog.
So the user didn't pick any option,
that means you cannot
send notifications, but
you can ask again later.
If you get denied, you won't be able to
ask the user again for notifications.
So if the user denies you permission,
next time you ask for permission,
it's denied automatically.
And typically in that case, the option
is to offer the user instructions,
hey, you need to go to there, to
the menu and enable this manually, okay?
And if it's granted, well, then you can
start notifying the user from the main
window, from a web worker, or from
a service worker, because the permission
is the same no matter the API that you
will use later to notify the user.
So the confusion is even worse.
This is the permission also for push.
It's the same permission for
old classic desktop notification,
for the new push-based notification,
and also for subscribing to a push.
Same permission,
it's called notification, okay?
After you have permission, then you
can create a notification like this.
It's also weird because you don't send
that object that you create to a manager,
you just create a notification,
that's all.
Automatically, that object will
talk to the OS, somehow, okay?
We won't use this API,
this is the classic one.
So that's why I'm giving you the code, but
we will use the other one,
the new one, okay?
Make sense?
Any question?
With this API, you can notify the user
in the background only from workers or
from a background tab.
So your app must be up and
running, maybe throttled, hidden,
but it's still running,
not from a service worker, okay?
So it's a local notification.
It's only available on Windows and
Worker, what I said a second ago, and
we can update the same
notification in the future.
So if the notification is still there,
we can actually update the text
with something new,
instead of creating a new one.
So there are some ideas to actually
improve the user experience.
And there are some events that
you can listen with add event
listener like show, click, or error.
As I mentioned before, this is deprecated
on Android, so it's marked as deprecated.